\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename readme.info
@settitle MDRevealer 2.2
@c %**end of header

@copying

Copyright @copyright{} 2013-2015 Robin Clifford. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported license.

@quotation
THE WORK (AS DEFINED BELOW) IS PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THIS CREATIVE COMMONS PUBLIC LICENSE ("CCPL" OR "LICENSE"). THE WORK IS PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT AND/OR OTHER APPLICABLE LAW. ANY USE OF THE WORK OTHER THAN AS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS LICENSE OR COPYRIGHT LAW IS PROHIBITED.@sp 1
@sp 1
BY EXERCISING ANY RIGHTS TO THE WORK PROVIDED HERE, YOU ACCEPT AND AGREE TO BE BOUND BY THE TERMS OF THIS LICENSE. TO THE EXTENT THIS LICENSE MAY BE CONSIDERED TO BE A CONTRACT, THE LICENSOR GRANTS YOU THE RIGHTS CONTAINED HERE IN CONSIDERATION OF YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF SUCH TERMS AND CONDITIONS.@sp 1
@sp 1
1. Definitions@sp 1
@sp 1
   1. "Adaptation" means a work based upon the Work, or upon the Work and other pre-existing works, such as a translation, adaptation, derivative work, arrangement of music or other alterations of a literary or artistic work, or phonogram or performance and includes cinematographic adaptations or any other form in which the Work may be recast, transformed, or adapted including in any form recognizably derived from the original, except that a work that constitutes a Collection will not be considered an Adaptation for the purpose of this License. For the avoidance of doubt, where the Work is a musical work, performance or phonogram, the synchronization of the Work in timed-relation with a moving image ("synching") will be considered an Adaptation for the purpose of this License.@sp 1
   2. "Collection" means a collection of literary or artistic works, such as encyclopedias and anthologies, or performances, phonograms or broadcasts, or other works or subject matter other than works listed in Section 1(f) below, which, by reason of the selection and arrangement of their contents, constitute intellectual creations, in which the Work is included in its entirety in unmodified form along with one or more other contributions, each constituting separate and independent works in themselves, which together are assembled into a collective whole. A work that constitutes a Collection will not be considered an Adaptation (as defined below) for the purposes of this License.@sp 1
   3. "Creative Commons Compatible License" means a license that is listed at http://creativecommons.org/compatiblelicenses that has been approved by Creative Commons as being essentially equivalent to this License, including, at a minimum, because that license: (i) contains terms that have the same purpose, meaning and effect as the License Elements of this License; and, (ii) explicitly permits the relicensing of adaptations of works made available under that license under this License or a Creative Commons jurisdiction license with the same License Elements as this License.@sp 1
   4. "Distribute" means to make available to the public the original and copies of the Work or Adaptation, as appropriate, through sale or other transfer of ownership.@sp 1
   5. "License Elements" means the following high-level license attributes as selected by Licensor and indicated in the title of this License: Attribution, ShareAlike.@sp 1
   6. "Licensor" means the individual, individuals, entity or entities that offer(s) the Work under the terms of this License.@sp 1
   7. "Original Author" means, in the case of a literary or artistic work, the individual, individuals, entity or entities who created the Work or if no individual or entity can be identified, the publisher; and in addition (i) in the case of a performance the actors, singers, musicians, dancers, and other persons who act, sing, deliver, declaim, play in, interpret or otherwise perform literary or artistic works or expressions of folklore; (ii) in the case of a phonogram the producer being the person or legal entity who first fixes the sounds of a performance or other sounds; and, (iii) in the case of broadcasts, the organization that transmits the broadcast.@sp 1
   8. "Work" means the literary and/or artistic work offered under the terms of this License including without limitation any production in the literary, scientific and artistic domain, whatever may be the mode or form of its expression including digital form, such as a book, pamphlet and other writing; a lecture, address, sermon or other work of the same nature; a dramatic or dramatico-musical work; a choreographic work or entertainment in dumb show; a musical composition with or without words; a cinematographic work to which are assimilated works expressed by a process analogous to cinematography; a work of drawing, painting, architecture, sculpture, engraving or lithography; a photographic work to which are assimilated works expressed by a process analogous to photography; a work of applied art; an illustration, map, plan, sketch or three-dimensional work relative to geography, topography, architecture or science; a performance; a broadcast; a phonogram; a compilation of data to the extent it is protected as a copyrightable work; or a work performed by a variety or circus performer to the extent it is not otherwise considered a literary or artistic work.@sp 1
   9. "You" means an individual or entity exercising rights under this License who has not previously violated the terms of this License with respect to the Work, or who has received express permission from the Licensor to exercise rights under this License despite a previous violation.@sp 1
  10. "Publicly Perform" means to perform public recitations of the Work and to communicate to the public those public recitations, by any means or process, including by wire or wireless means or public digital performances; to make available to the public Works in such a way that members of the public may access these Works from a place and at a place individually chosen by them; to perform the Work to the public by any means or process and the communication to the public of the performances of the Work, including by public digital performance; to broadcast and rebroadcast the Work by any means including signs, sounds or images.@sp 1
  11. "Reproduce" means to make copies of the Work by any means including without limitation by sound or visual recordings and the right of fixation and reproducing fixations of the Work, including storage of a protected performance or phonogram in digital form or other electronic medium.@sp 1
@sp 1
2. Fair Dealing Rights. Nothing in this License is intended to reduce, limit, or restrict any uses free from copyright or rights arising from limitations or exceptions that are provided for in connection with the copyright protection under copyright law or other applicable laws.@sp 1
@sp 1
3. License Grant. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, Licensor hereby grants You a worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive, perpetual (for the duration of the applicable copyright) license to exercise the rights in the Work as stated below:@sp 1
@sp 1
   1. to Reproduce the Work, to incorporate the Work into one or more Collections, and to Reproduce the Work as incorporated in the Collections;@sp 1
   2. to create and Reproduce Adaptations provided that any such Adaptation, including any translation in any medium, takes reasonable steps to clearly label, demarcate or otherwise identify that changes were made to the original Work. For example, a translation could be marked "The original work was translated from English to Spanish," or a modification could indicate "The original work has been modified.";@sp 1
   3. to Distribute and Publicly Perform the Work including as incorporated in Collections; and,@sp 1
   4. to Distribute and Publicly Perform Adaptations.@sp 1
   5.@sp 2
      For the avoidance of doubt:@sp 1
         1. Non-waivable Compulsory License Schemes. In those jurisdictions in which the right to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory licensing scheme cannot be waived, the Licensor reserves the exclusive right to collect such royalties for any exercise by You of the rights granted under this License;@sp 1
         2. Waivable Compulsory License Schemes. In those jurisdictions in which the right to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory licensing scheme can be waived, the Licensor waives the exclusive right to collect such royalties for any exercise by You of the rights granted under this License; and,@sp 1
         3. Voluntary License Schemes. The Licensor waives the right to collect royalties, whether individually or, in the event that the Licensor is a member of a collecting society that administers voluntary licensing schemes, via that society, from any exercise by You of the rights granted under this License.@sp 1
@sp 1
The above rights may be exercised in all media and formats whether now known or hereafter devised. The above rights include the right to make such modifications as are technically necessary to exercise the rights in other media and formats. Subject to Section 8(f), all rights not expressly granted by Licensor are hereby reserved.@sp 1
@sp 1
4. Restrictions. The license granted in Section 3 above is expressly made subject to and limited by the following restrictions:@sp 1
@sp 1
   1. You may Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work only under the terms of this License. You must include a copy of, or the Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) for, this License with every copy of the Work You Distribute or Publicly Perform. You may not offer or impose any terms on the Work that restrict the terms of this License or the ability of the recipient of the Work to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the License. You may not sublicense the Work. You must keep intact all notices that refer to this License and to the disclaimer of warranties with every copy of the Work You Distribute or Publicly Perform. When You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work, You may not impose any effective technological measures on the Work that restrict the ability of a recipient of the Work from You to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the License. This Section 4(a) applies to the Work as incorporated in a Collection, but this does not require the Collection apart from the Work itself to be made subject to the terms of this License. If You create a Collection, upon notice from any Licensor You must, to the extent practicable, remove from the Collection any credit as required by Section 4(c), as requested. If You create an Adaptation, upon notice from any Licensor You must, to the extent practicable, remove from the Adaptation any credit as required by Section 4(c), as requested.@sp 1
   2. You may Distribute or Publicly Perform an Adaptation only under the terms of: (i) this License; (ii) a later version of this License with the same License Elements as this License; (iii) a Creative Commons jurisdiction license (either this or a later license version) that contains the same License Elements as this License (e.g., Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 US)); (iv) a Creative Commons Compatible License. If you license the Adaptation under one of the licenses mentioned in (iv), you must comply with the terms of that license. If you license the Adaptation under the terms of any of the licenses mentioned in (i), (ii) or (iii) (the "Applicable License"), you must comply with the terms of the Applicable License generally and the following provisions: (I) You must include a copy of, or the URI for, the Applicable License with every copy of each Adaptation You Distribute or Publicly Perform; (II) You may not offer or impose any terms on the Adaptation that restrict the terms of the Applicable License or the ability of the recipient of the Adaptation to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the Applicable License; (III) You must keep intact all notices that refer to the Applicable License and to the disclaimer of warranties with every copy of the Work as included in the Adaptation You Distribute or Publicly Perform; (IV) when You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Adaptation, You may not impose any effective technological measures on the Adaptation that restrict the ability of a recipient of the Adaptation from You to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the Applicable License. This Section 4(b) applies to the Adaptation as incorporated in a Collection, but this does not require the Collection apart from the Adaptation itself to be made subject to the terms of the Applicable License.@sp 1
   3. If You Distribute, or Publicly Perform the Work or any Adaptations or Collections, You must, unless a request has been made pursuant to Section 4(a), keep intact all copyright notices for the Work and provide, reasonable to the medium or means You are utilizing: (i) the name of the Original Author (or pseudonym, if applicable) if supplied, and/or if the Original Author and/or Licensor designate another party or parties (e.g., a sponsor institute, publishing entity, journal) for attribution ("Attribution Parties") in Licensor's copyright notice, terms of service or by other reasonable means, the name of such party or parties; (ii) the title of the Work if supplied; (iii) to the extent reasonably practicable, the URI, if any, that Licensor specifies to be associated with the Work, unless such URI does not refer to the copyright notice or licensing information for the Work; and (iv) , consistent with Ssection 3(b), in the case of an Adaptation, a credit identifying the use of the Work in the Adaptation (e.g., "French translation of the Work by Original Author," or "Screenplay based on original Work by Original Author"). The credit required by this Section 4(c) may be implemented in any reasonable manner; provided, however, that in the case of a Adaptation or Collection, at a minimum such credit will appear, if a credit for all contributing authors of the Adaptation or Collection appears, then as part of these credits and in a manner at least as prominent as the credits for the other contributing authors. For the avoidance of doubt, You may only use the credit required by this Section for the purpose of attribution in the manner set out above and, by exercising Your rights under this License, You may not implicitly or explicitly assert or imply any connection with, sponsorship or endorsement by the Original Author, Licensor and/or Attribution Parties, as appropriate, of You or Your use of the Work, without the separate, express prior written permission of the Original Author, Licensor and/or Attribution Parties.@sp 1
   4. Except as otherwise agreed in writing by the Licensor or as may be otherwise permitted by applicable law, if You Reproduce, Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work either by itself or as part of any Adaptations or Collections, You must not distort, mutilate, modify or take other derogatory action in relation to the Work which would be prejudicial to the Original Author's honor or reputation. Licensor agrees that in those jurisdictions (e.g. Japan), in which any exercise of the right granted in Section 3(b) of this License (the right to make Adaptations) would be deemed to be a distortion, mutilation, modification or other derogatory action prejudicial to the Original Author's honor and reputation, the Licensor will waive or not assert, as appropriate, this Section, to the fullest extent permitted by the applicable national law, to enable You to reasonably exercise Your right under Section 3(b) of this License (right to make Adaptations) but not otherwise.@sp 1
@sp 1
5. Representations, Warranties and Disclaimer@sp 1
@sp 1
UNLESS OTHERWISE MUTUALLY AGREED TO BY THE PARTIES IN WRITING, LICENSOR OFFERS THE WORK AS-IS AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE WORK, EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTIBILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NONINFRINGEMENT, OR THE ABSENCE OF LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OF ABSENCE OF ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT DISCOVERABLE. SOME JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES, SO SUCH EXCLUSION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.@sp 1
@sp 1
6. Limitation on Liability. EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW, IN NO EVENT WILL LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LEGAL THEORY FOR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR EXEMPLARY DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THIS LICENSE OR THE USE OF THE WORK, EVEN IF LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.@sp 1
@sp 1
7. Termination@sp 1
@sp 1
   1. This License and the rights granted hereunder will terminate automatically upon any breach by You of the terms of this License. Individuals or entities who have received Adaptations or Collections from You under this License, however, will not have their licenses terminated provided such individuals or entities remain in full compliance with those licenses. Sections 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8 will survive any termination of this License.@sp 1
   2. Subject to the above terms and conditions, the license granted here is perpetual (for the duration of the applicable copyright in the Work). Notwithstanding the above, Licensor reserves the right to release the Work under different license terms or to stop distributing the Work at any time; provided, however that any such election will not serve to withdraw this License (or any other license that has been, or is required to be, granted under the terms of this License), and this License will continue in full force and effect unless terminated as stated above.@sp 1
@sp 1
8. Miscellaneous@sp 1
@sp 1
   1. Each time You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work or a Collection, the Licensor offers to the recipient a license to the Work on the same terms and conditions as the license granted to You under this License.@sp 1
   2. Each time You Distribute or Publicly Perform an Adaptation, Licensor offers to the recipient a license to the original Work on the same terms and conditions as the license granted to You under this License.@sp 1
   3. If any provision of this License is invalid or unenforceable under applicable law, it shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of the terms of this License, and without further action by the parties to this agreement, such provision shall be reformed to the minimum extent necessary to make such provision valid and enforceable.@sp 1
   4. No term or provision of this License shall be deemed waived and no breach consented to unless such waiver or consent shall be in writing and signed by the party to be charged with such waiver or consent.@sp 1
   5. This License constitutes the entire agreement between the parties with respect to the Work licensed here. There are no understandings, agreements or representations with respect to the Work not specified here. Licensor shall not be bound by any additional provisions that may appear in any communication from You. This License may not be modified without the mutual written agreement of the Licensor and You.@sp 1
   6. The rights granted under, and the subject matter referenced, in this License were drafted utilizing the terminology of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (as amended on September 28, 1979), the Rome Convention of 1961, the WIPO Copyright Treaty of 1996, the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty of 1996 and the Universal Copyright Convention (as revised on July 24, 1971). These rights and subject matter take effect in the relevant jurisdiction in which the License terms are sought to be enforced according to the corresponding provisions of the implementation of those treaty provisions in the applicable national law. If the standard suite of rights granted under applicable copyright law includes additional rights not granted under this License, such additional rights are deemed to be included in the License; this License is not intended to restrict the license of any rights under applicable law.@sp 1
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title @dfn{MDRevealer} 2.2 
@author Robin Clifford
@page
@xref{Copying} for copyright information.
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@end titlepage

@contents

@node Top
@top @dfn{MDRevealer} 2.2

This manual is for @dfn{MDRevealer} (version 2.2, updated 6/29/2015), which 
processes data files from identification / antibiotic susceptibility testing 
(ID/AST) machines.

@menu
* The History of @dfn{MDRevealer}::	A brief history of the program.
* Configuring @dfn{MDRevealer}::	Editing @dfn{MDRevealer}'s configuration file.
* Configuring the XML Tests::	Editing the XML files that define tests to be run on the data.
* Custom Parser Files:: An explanation of how users can create custom parser
configurations.
* Other Configuration Files::		Working with the other files in the program's "data" directory.
* Using @dfn{MDRevealer}::		How to use the program.
* Copying::			The licenses of this manual and the program.
* Contributing::		How to improve the program.
* Compiling::			How to compile the program (and this manual) from source.
* Contact::			Contacting the author(s) of the program.
@end menu

@node The History of @dfn{MDRevealer}
@chapter The History of @dfn{MDRevealer}

@dfn{MDRevealer}'s origin lies in a series of Perl scripts written by 
Robert Clifford from the Multidrug resistant organism Repository and 
Surveillance Network (MRSN) at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research 
(WRAIR). For hospitals, manually parsing the results from identification / 
antibiotic susceptibility testing (ID/AST) machines to identify multidrug 
resistant isolates was time-consuming and error-prone. Therefore, he wrote a set
of Perl scripts to automate this process.

Unfortunately, these Perl scripts had their own shortcomings. For one, they only
ran on computers which had Perl installed; for another, they lacked a
user-friendly interface. In order to resolve these issues, Robin Clifford, while
an intern at WRAIR, re-implemented them as a Java application. He addded a
graphical user interface (GUI), localization support via GNU gettext, and
extended the functionality of the program to make it easier for users to
customize definitions of multidrug resistant and antibiotic susceptiblity.

@dfn{MDRevealer} processes files from Phoenix, Vitek2, and Microscan ID/AST
machines, and produces output in multiple formats.

@node Configuring @dfn{MDRevealer}
@chapter Configuring @dfn{MDRevealer}

Before using @dfn{MDRevealer}, you must first set up its configuration files. 
The main configuration file is located in the "data" directory of the program, 
and is called @strong{config.txt}. By default, it looks like this:

@sp 2

@example
Facility @ @ @ @ 0000
Machine name @ @ @ @ Test Machine

#If you want the program to write its output files to the same place every
#time, delete the # marks from the lines below and change the names of
#"report.txt" and so on to what you want the outputs to be called.

Default detailed report location @ @ @ @ output/report.txt
Default summary location @ @ @ @ output/summary.txt
Default spreadsheet location @ @ @ @ output/spreadsheet.txt
Default .dat location @ @ @ @ output/dat.txt
Default localized output @ @ @ @ output/localized.txt

Default MDR file @ @ @ @ data/mdr.txt
Default breakpoints file @ @ @ @ data/breakpoints.txt
Custom parser file @ @ @ @ data/parsers/my_parser.txt

.dat output
lastName @ @ @ @ firstName @ @ @ @ middleI @ @ @ @ dmisId @ @ @ @ spin @ @ @ @ 
ssnPrefix @ @ @ @ ssn @ @ @ @ dob @ @ @ @ gender @ @ @ @ accession  @ @ @ @ 
isolationDate @ @ @ @ cultureType @ @ @ @ source @ @ @ @ locationType @ @ @ @ 
location @ @ @ @ isolate @ @ @ @ organism @ @ @ @ alternateOrganism @ @ @ @ 
equipment @ @ @ @ antibiotic @ @ @ @ mic @ @ @ @ call
@end example
@sp 2

The contents of @strong{config.txt} are described in the following sections.

@section The "Facility" Field

MDRevealer looks for a line beginning with "Facility" (minus the quotes), a
tab, and the four-digit ID number of the facility the data came from. The ID 
number refers to a facility in @strong{data/hospitals.txt}. The 
@strong{hospitals.txt} file included with the program contains a list of all
US Army medical facilities. To add a new hospital, the entry for ID 
number 0000 can be edited.

@section The "Machine name" Field

MDRevealer looks for a line beginning with "Machine name" (minus the quotes), a
tab, and the name of the machine the isolates were tested on. This lets the user
specify the equipment name if it isn't provided in the input file.

@section The "Parser" Field

MDRevealer looks for a line beginning with "Parser" (minus the quotes), a tab,
and the name of a parser. Valid parsers are:


If a parser isn't uncommented in @strong{config.txt}, then MDRevealer will
display a warning and close.

@section Default Locations

Each type of MDRevealer output file has a default name and location. If 
you don't want the program to automatically write your output files to a default
location, simply delete those lines. Otherwise, change "report.txt", 
"summary.txt", "spreadsheet.txt", etc. to your preferred location.
All locations are relative to the program (MDRevealer.jar). 
For example, if you want the program to write your detailed reports to 
"report.txt" in a folder called "output", which is in the same folder as the 
program, you would do this:
@example
...
Default detailed report location @ @ @ @ output/report.txt
...
@end example

If you want it to be written to a folder called "output" in your home directory,
you would do this (on GNU/Linux, *BSD, OS X, etc.):

@example
Default detailed report location @ @ @ @ /home/[your username]/output/report.txt
@end example

Or on Windows:

@example
Default detailed report location @ @ @ @ C:/Users/[your username]/output/report.txt
@end example

Please note that the directory must be created before MDRevealer is run.

@section Default MDR Criteria and Drug Susceptibility Breakpoints

If you want to use custom antibiotic susceptibility breakpoints or MDR criteria,
just comment out the lines, and when you run the program, it'll prompt you
to give it an MDR definition file and a breakpoint file every time. To comment 
them out, change the lines to this:

@example
#Default MDR file @ @ @ @ data/mdr.txt
#Default breakpoints file @ @ @ @ data/breakpoints.txt
@end example

@section Custom parser file

This line points to the file that will be used when the user selects the
"custom parser" option in MDRevealer.

@section .dat output.

If the program finds a line in config.txt labeled ".dat output", it uses
the next line to determine which data fields should appear in the tab-delimited
.dat output file.

The fields the program recognizes are:

@itemize @bullet

@item
lastName = The last name of the patient. (Ex: SMITH)

@item
firstName = The first name of the patient. (Ex: JOHN)

@item
middleI = The middle initial of the patient. (Ex: Q)

@item
dmisId = The facility the bacterium was found at. (Ex: 9009 TEST HOSPITAL)

@item
spin = 	An identifier used by MRSN.

@item
ssnPrefix = The SSN prefix of the patient, used in the US military healthcare
system. (Ex: 20)

@item
ssn = The Social Security Number (SSN) of the patient. (Ex: 987654320)

@item
dob = The birth date of the patient. (Ex: 07/04/1776)

@item
gender = The gender of the patient. (Ex: F)

@item
accession = The accesssion number of the bacterium. (Ex: 12121)

@item
isolationDate = The date the clinical sample was taken from the patient. 
(Ex: 7/16/2013)

@item
cultureType = A general description of the tissue or fluid that the organism
was isolated from. (Ex: BLOOD)

@item
source = A more specific version of cultureType. (Ex: LEG ABSCESS)

@item
locationType = A general hospital location. (Ex: ICU)

@item
location =  A specific location within a hospital. (Ex: WARD 5)

@item
isolate = The isolate number of the bacterium. If multiple species of bacterium
are isolated from a single culture, each has the same accession, but a unique
isolate number. (Ex: 2)

@item
organism = The organism's display name from @strong{organisms.txt}. 
(Ex: E. coli)

@item
alternateOrganism = Rarely used; generally only found when "organism" is 
"other". (Ex: Shigella sonnei)

@item
longOrganism = The organism's full name. 
(Ex: Acinetobacter baumannii)

@item
equipment = The ID/AST equipment used to produce the data. (Ex: Vitek2)

@item
antibiotic = The name of the drug tested. Each drug tested will appear on a
separate row. (Ex: Amikacin)

@item
mic = The minimum inhibitory concentration. Each  MIC will appear on a separate
row. (Ex: <=1)

@item
call = Whether the organism was sensitive, resistant, or indeterminate. Each 
call will appear on a separate row. (Ex: S)

@end itemize

The user can delete or reorder these fields in config.txt as they see fit in
order to create their own customized .dat file.

@node Configuring the XML Tests
@chapter Configuring the XML Tests

MDRevealer 2.0 added support for writing your own tests for carbapenem
resistance, MRSA status, VRE status, or ESBL status. An example:

@example
<?xml version="1.0"?>
	<test>
		<test_name>PSA Carb Test</test_name>
		<bacterium>Pseudomonas</bacterium>
		<condition number = "1" default = "passed">
			<drug>
				<name>Cefepime</name>
				<if read_type = "Call" value = "S">
					<condition_status>failed</condition_status>
				</if>
			</drug>
			<drug>
				<name>Cefotaxime</name>
				<if read_type = "Call" value = "S">
					<condition_status>failed</condition_status>
				</if>
			</drug>
			<drug>
				<name>Ceftazidime</name>
				<if read_type = "Call" value = "S">
					<condition_status>failed</condition_status>
				</if>
			</drug>
			<drug>
				<name>Ceftriaxone</name>
				<if read_type = "Call" value = "S">
					<condition_status>failed</condition_status>
				</if>
			</drug>
			<drug>
				<name>Ertapenem</name>
				<if read_type = "Call" value = "S">
					<condition_status>failed</condition_status>
				</if>
			</drug>
		</condition>
		<condition number = "2" default = "failed" number_required = "1">
			<drug>
				<name>Doripenem</name>
				<if read_type = "MIC" comparison="greater_than_equal" value = "4">
					<condition_status>+</condition_status>
				</if>
				<name>Imipenem</name>
				<if read_type = "MIC" comparison="greater_than_equal" value = "4">
					<condition_status>+</condition_status>
				</if>
				<name>Meropenem</name>
				<if read_type = "MIC" comparison="greater_than_equal" value = "4">
					<condition_status>+</condition_status>
				</if>
			</drug>
		</condition>
		<required_condition>1</required_condition>
		<required_condition>2</required_condition>
		<result>Carb</result>
	</test>
@end example

In English, this works out to...

@example
Test all bacteria with Pseudomonas in their name.
Condition #1 is met by default, and must be failed.
If the call of Cefepime is S, fail the condition.
If the call of Cefotaxime is S, fail the condition.
If the call of Ceftazidime is S, fail the condition.
If the call of Ceftriaxone is S, fail the condition.
If the call of Ertapenem is S, fail the condition.
Condition #2 is failed by default, and must be met.
If one sub-condition is true, the condition is met.
If the MIC of Doripenem is >=4, the sub-condition is met.
If the MIC of Imipenem is >=4, the sub-condition is met.
If the MIC of Meropenem is >=4, the sub-condition is met.
Condition 1 must be met.
Condition 2 must be met.
If the above conditions are met, the bacterium is carbapenem resistant.
@end example

Here's a list of tags MDRevealer will recognize.

@itemize @bullet

@item
<test>: Defines a test.

@item
<test_name>: Defines the name of the test. It gets printed to stdout when
the program executes the test.

@item
<bacterium>: The name of the bacterium to run tests against. The program
will look for any bacteria containing this name: 
<bacterium>Klebsiella</bacterium> will result in the program running its
tests against any bacterium with "Klebsiella" in its name.
Setting the name to "Generic" will have it run tests on any bacteria
whose name is not found in "carbapenem.txt".
Setting the name to "Any" will have it run tests on all bacteria.

@item
<condition>: Defines a condition.


@itemize 
Attributes:

@item
number: The number of the condition, used for identifying it.

@item
default: Must be either "passed" or "failed". It determines if the test
is considered to be passed or failed by default.

@item
number_required: The number of sub-conditions that must be passed to consider
the condition passed.

For example:

@example

For condition 2: one or more of Doripenem, Imipenem, and Meropnem must
have a MIC >=4.

In this case, Doripenem's MIC being >=4 would be a sub-condition.

@end example

@end itemize

@item
<drug>: Defines a drug.

@item
<name>: Defines the name of a drug.

@item
<if>: If the conditions in its attributes are met, the program does whatever
<condition_status> says to do.

@itemize 
Attributes:

@item
read_type: The type of read to look at: call or MIC.

@item
comparison: Must be either "less_than_equal" (<=), "less_than" (<),
"greater_than_equal" (>=), or "greater_than" (>).

@item
value: What value to compare the read_type to.

@end itemize

@item
<condition_status>: What to do if <if> is met.

@itemize 
@item
failed: Fail the condition.

@item
passed: Pass the condition.

@item
+: Pass the sub-condition.

@item
-: Fail the sub-condition.

@end itemize

@item
<required_condition>: This condition must be met to pass the test.


@item
<required_if>: This condition must be met to pass the test, but only
if the requirements in its attributes are met.

An example:

@example
		<required_if drug="Ertapenem" read_type="MIC" comparison="greater_than_equal" value="1">1</required_if>
		<required_if drug="Ertapenem" read_type="MIC" comparison="less_than_equal" value="0">2</required_if>
		<required_if drug="Ertapenem" read_type="MIC" comparison="less_than_equal" value="0.5">3</required_if>
@end example

And in English:

@example
If the MIC of Ertapenem is >=1, condition 1 must be met.
If the MIC of Ertapenem is <=0, condition 2 must be met.
If the MIC of Ertapenem is <=0.5, condition 3 must be met.
@end example

Attributes are the same as the ones for <if>.


@item
<result>: What to do if the test is passed.

@itemize 

@item
Carb: Mark the isolate as carbapenem resistant.

@item
MRSA: Mark the isolate as MRSA.

@item
ESBL: Mark the isolate as ESBL.

@item
VRE: Mark the isolate as VRE.

@item
Anything else: Mark the isolate as whatever you put between the tags.

@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Custom Parser Files
@chapter Custom Parser Files

MDRevealer 2.2 added support for user-generated parsers.

An example file:

@example
Last Name @ @ @ @ 1
First Name @ @ @ @ 2
Middle Initial @ @ @ @ 3
DMIS ID @ @ @ @ 4
SPIN Number @ @ @ @ 5
SSN Prefix @ @ @ @ 6
Social Security Number @ @ @ @ 7
Date of Birth @ @ @ @ 8
Gender @ @ @ @ 9
Accession @ @ @ @ 10
Isolation Date @ @ @ @ 11
Culture Type @ @ @ @ 12
Source @ @ @ @ 13
Location Type @ @ @ @ 14
Location @ @ @ @ 15
Isolate Number @ @ @ @ 16
Organism Name @ @ @ @ 17
Alternate Organism Name @ @ @ @ 18
Equipment @ @ @ @ 19
Drug Info @ @ @ @ 20
Drug Info Format @ @ @ @ Call,MIC
ESBL @ @ @ @ 129
AMP C @ @ @ @ 130
Drugs per line @ @ @ @ 54
@end example

Each line contains the name of a piece of information that MDRevealer
looks for, a tab, and the tab number where it can be found.
All fields found here are the same as those used to configure .dat output,
with some exceptions:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Drug Info: The line where information about the drugs used (name, MIC, call,
etc.) begins.

@item
Drug Info Format: What fields are used for each drug. If a sample set of cells
looked like:

@example
Amikacin @ @ @ @ S @ @ @ @ <=2
@end example

The corresponding parser line would be:

@example
Drug Info Format @ @ @ @ Name,Call,MIC
@end example

@item 
Full Name: The full name of the patient.

@item
Drugs per line: How many drugs are contained on a line of the input file.
In this example, only one drug is found per line, like so:

@example
lastName	firstName	middleI	dmisId	spin	ssnPrefix	ssn	dob	gender	accession	isolationDate	cultureType	source	locationType	location	isolate	organism	alternateOrganism	equipment	antibiotic	mic	call	
A	A	A	0000	10142012000001212101		987654321	01/01/1888	F	12121	10/14/2012	URINE CULTURE			INTERNAL MED	01	K. pneumoniae		Vitek	Amikacin	<=2	S	
A	A	A	0000	10142012000001212101		987654321	01/01/1888	F	12121	10/14/2012	URINE CULTURE			INTERNAL MED	01	K. pneumoniae		Vitek	Ampicillin	>=32	R	
A	A	A	0000	10142012000001212101		987654321	01/01/1888	F	12121	10/14/2012	URINE CULTURE			INTERNAL MED	01	K. pneumoniae		Vitek	Amp/Sulbactam	8	S	
A	A	A	0000	10142012000001212101		987654321	01/01/1888	F	12121	10/14/2012	URINE CULTURE			INTERNAL MED	01	K. pneumoniae		Vitek	Aztreonam	<=1	S	
A	A	A	0000	10142012000001212101		987654321	01/01/1888	F	12121	10/14/2012	URINE CULTURE			INTERNAL MED	01	K. pneumoniae		Vitek	Cefazolin	<=4	 	
A	A	A	0000	10142012000001212101		987654321	01/01/1888	F	12121	10/14/2012	URINE CULTURE			INTERNAL MED	01	K. pneumoniae		Vitek	Cefepime	<=1	S	
A	A	A	0000	10142012000001212101		987654321	01/01/1888	F	12121	10/14/2012	URINE CULTURE			INTERNAL MED	01	K. pneumoniae		Vitek	Ceftriaxone	<=1	S	
A	A	A	0000	10142012000001212101		987654321	01/01/1888	F	12121	10/14/2012	URINE CULTURE			INTERNAL MED	01	K. pneumoniae		Vitek	Ciprofloxacin	<=0.25	S	
A	A	A	0000	10142012000001212101		987654321	01/01/1888	F	12121	10/14/2012	URINE CULTURE			INTERNAL MED	01	K. pneumoniae		Vitek	Ertapenem	<=0.5	 	
A	A	A	0000	10142012000001212101		987654321	01/01/1888	F	12121	10/14/2012	URINE CULTURE			INTERNAL MED	01	K. pneumoniae		Vitek	ESBL	Pos	+	
@end example

The MicroScan parser file looks for 45 drugs per line, like this:

@example
Last Name	First Name	Institution	Patient ID	Date of Birth	Gender	Specimen	Collect Date	Source	Isolate	Organism	Amikacin Interpretation	Amikacin MIC	Amox/K Clav Interpretation	Amox/K Clav MIC	Amp/Sulbactam Interpretation	Amp/Sulbactam MIC	Ampicillin Interpretation	Ampicillin MIC	Azithromycin Interpretation	Azithromycin MIC	Aztreonam Interpretation	Aztreonam MIC	Cefazolin Interpretation	Cefazolin MIC	Cefepime Interpretation	Cefepime MIC	Cefotaxime Interpretation	Cefotaxime MIC	Cefotetan Interpretation	Cefotetan MIC	Cefoxitin Interpretation	Cefoxitin MIC	Ceftazidime Interpretation	Ceftazidime MIC	Ceftriaxone Interpretation	Ceftriaxone MIC	Cefuroxime Interpretation	Cefuroxime MIC	Cephalothin Interpretation	Cephalothin MIC	Chloramphenicol Interpretation	Chloramphenicol MIC	Ciprofloxacin Interpretation	Ciprofloxacin MIC	Clarithromycin Interpretation	Clarithromycin MIC	Clindamycin Interpretation	Clindamycin MIC	Colistin Interpretation	Colistin MIC	Daptomycin Interpretation	Daptomycin MIC	Doripenem Interpretation	Doripenem MIC	Ertapenem Interpretation	Ertapenem MIC	Erythromycin Interpretation	Erythromycin MIC	Gatifloxacin Interpretation	Gatifloxacin MIC	Gentamicin Interpretation	Gentamicin MIC	Imipenem Interpretation	Imipenem MIC	Levofloxacin Interpretation	Levofloxacin MIC	Linezolid Interpretation	Linezolid MIC	Meropenem Interpretation	Meropenem MIC	Minocycline Interpretation	Minocycline MIC	Moxifloxacin Interpretation	Moxifloxacin MIC	Nitrofurantoin Interpretation	Nitrofurantoin MIC	Norfloxacin Interpretation	Norfloxacin MIC	Oxacillin Interpretation	Oxacillin MIC	Penicillin Interpretation	Penicillin MIC	Pip/Tazo Interpretation	Pip/Tazo MIC	Synercid Interpretation	Synercid MIC	Rifampin Interpretation	Rifampin MIC	Tetracycline Interpretation	Tetracycline MIC	Ticar/K Clav Interpretation	Ticar/K Clav MIC	Tigecycline Interpretation	Tigecycline MIC	Tobramycin Interpretation	Tobramycin MIC	Trimeth/Sulfa Interpretation	Trimeth/Sulfa MIC	Vancomycin Interpretation	Vancomycin MIC	ESBL Confirm Ceftazidime Interpretation	ESBL Confirm Ceftazidime MIC	ESBL-a Scrn Interpretation	ESBL-a Scrn MIC	ESBL-b Scrn Interpretation	ESBL-b Scrn MIC
JOJO	JOEY		111223333	01/01/1888	Male	1		URINE	1	Escherichia coli	S	<=16	S	<=8/4	S	<=8/4	S	<=8			S	<=8	S	<=8	S	<=8	S	<=2			S	<=8	S	<=1	S	<=8	S	<=4					S	<=1									S	<=0.5	S	<=1					S	<=4	S	<=1	S	<=2									S	<=32							S	<=16					S	<=4			S	<=2	S	<=4	S	<=2/38								
@end example

@end itemize

@node Other Configuration Files
@chapter Other Configuration Files

Each data file used by MDRevealer has one or more fields, each
separated by a tab.

@section breakpoints.txt

This file is used to provide customized susceptibility breakpoints that will
replace the susceptibility calls made by an ID/AST machine.

A line in breakpoints.txt looks like this:

@example
ACB @ @ @ @ Amikacin @ @ @ @ 16 @ @ @ @ 64
@end example

The first column is the name of the organism.

The second column is the name of the drug you're testing against the organism.

If the MIC of the drug is less than or equal to the value in the third column,
the program will call it sensitive (S).

If the MIC of the drug is greater than or equal to the value in the fourth
column, the program will call it resistant (R).

If the MIC of the drug is in between the two values, the program will call it
indeterminate (I).

If a breakpoints file is selected, and the input file contains an organism/drug
combination absent from @strong{mdr.txt}, the program will write a warning and 
set the call to "X".

@section carbapenem.txt

A line in carbapenem.txt looks like this:

@example
ACB
@end example

Any organism whose name is found in this file will be excluded from the generic
carbapenem test.

All names in carbapenem.txt must be in ALL CAPS.

@section drugnames.txt

A line in drugnames.txt looks like this:

@example
amikacin @ @ @ @ Amikacin
@end example

The first column is the synonym for a drug.

The second column is the preferred drug name.

This file helps prevent confusion due to alternate names for drugs, or
simple misspellings. To avoid false positives in warnings.txt, the proper name
must also be in the file, like so:

@example
Amikacin @ @ @ @ Amikacin
@end example

@section hospitals.txt

A line in hospitals.txt looks like this:

@example
0001 @ @ @ @ FOX AHC-REDSTONE ARSENAL
@end example

The first column is the facility's ID number. The program
uses this field for creating the SPIN, an identifier for each bacterium used by
MRSN.

The second column is the name of the facility.

@section mdr.txt

A line in mdr.txt looks like this:

@example
ACB @ @ @ @ A @ @ @ @ Cefepime
@end example

The first column is the organism's name.

The second column is the category of the drug.
Each drug is assigned to an antibiotic category, such as beta-lactams,
aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, etc.
Each category should be marked with a letter: A through O. You shouldn't
need more than 15 categories, but if you do, email me. @xref{Contact}.

The last column is the organism's name.


@section organisms.txt

A line in organisms.txt looks like this:

@example
ACINETOBACTER LOWFFI @ @ @ @ Acinetobacter lwoffii @ @ @ @ A. lwoffii @ @ @ @ 834683456
@end example

The first column is a common name. This name must be in ALL CAPS.

The second name is used internally by the program. It must be genus and species.

The last name is the display name used in the output files. It can be whatever 
the user wants, but by default, it's the first letter of the genus, a dot, 
a space, and the species.

The number at the end is the organism's SNOMED code. Currently the program 
doesn't use this for anything, but it might at some point. This is optional, so
feel free to leave it off.

@section Submitting changes

If you add anything to any of these config files, please contact me at
rsclifford(at)hotmail(dot)com, so I can add it to the master data file.


@node Using @dfn{MDRevealer}
@chapter Using @dfn{MDRevealer}

Before running the program, make sure that every organism name in your input
file is in organisms.txt, and if not, add it. Otherwise, you won't get
the right results.

Once you've got the program configured, it's time to actually run it. A brief
explanation of each option follows.

@itemize @bullet

@item
Detailed report (in English) - Prints out a detailed list of all drugs a
bacterium's resistant/sensitive to.

@item
Summary (in English) - Prints accession, isolate, organism name, and MDR status.

@item
Spreadsheet (in English) - Prints out a tab-delimited text file with one sample
per row.

@item
.dat file (in English) - Prints out a tab-delimited text file with one organism/
drug per row.

@item
Detailed report (in your current language) - Prints out a detailed report in the
OS's current language.

@item
Ignore calls from the machines and have the program calculate them - Uses
breakpoints.txt to determine sensitive/resistant/intermediate status based on
the MIC. If no information about the organism-drug combo's available in
breakpoints.txt, the program will print a warning and set the call to "X".

@end itemize

The dropdown menu allows you to select which parser you want to use.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Vitek1 - A parser for a text report from the bioMeriux VITEK2 machine 
(format 1).

@item
Phoenix1 - A parser for a text report from the BD Phoenix machine (format 1).

@item
Custom parser - A parser that reads in a custom parser file and uses it to
determine how to parse the input file.

@end itemize

Once you've selected your options, hit "OK" to continue, "Cancel" to close the
program, or "About" to see the program's license.

After hitting "OK", select your input file. After the program calculates the
necessary info, it'll either automatically write your files to the default
locations specified in @strong{config.txt}, or it'll prompt you to give it a 
place to put them.

@section Warnings

Sometimes, information that the program thinks should be in its data files
won't be there. When that happens, it'll output a warning to warnings.txt,
found in the same directory as the program. Here are examples:

@example
Warning: the organism name "Staphylococcus aureus" does not appear in
organisms.txt. Either this is a typo, or the name is missing from the file.
@sp 1
No breakpoint found for Klebsiella pneumoniae and Amikacin
@end example

When the program tells you that things are missing, add them, and shoot me
an email so that I can add them to the data files for the next
version of the program.

@section Crashes

Sometimes, the program will close unexpectedly. When this happens, here's
what to do.

@itemize @bullet

@item
Is there a "lib" folder in the same directory as MDRevealer.jar,
and does that folder have a file called "libintl.jar" in it?

@item
Are you using the right parser? Using, say, the Vitek parser on
a file from a Phoenix machine might cause unexpected behavior.

@item
If you're sure that's not the case, look in warnings.txt. At the bottom,
you should see something like:

@example
Fatal error: class java.lang.IndexOutOfBoundsException

java.util.ArrayList.rangeCheck(ArrayList.java:635)
java.util.ArrayList.get(ArrayList.java:411)
MDRevealer.Output.printOutput(Output.java:91)
MDRevealer.Parser.parse(Parser.java:403)
MDRevealer.MDRevealer$ButtonListener.actionPerformed(MDRevealer.java:188)
@end example

Send your config file, your warnings file, and an anonymized version of your
input file to me, and I'll fix whatever the problem is.

@end itemize

@node Copying
@appendix Copying
@insertcopying

@dfn{MDRevealer} itself is licensed under the GNU General Public License
v3, or (at your discretion) any later version. For more information, please
see GPL.txt. 

This program uses libintl from GNU gettext 0.18.3, which is copyright (C) 2001, 
2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc, and licensed under the LGPL version 2.1 
or later. For more information, please see LGPL.txt. 

It also uses Apache Commons Collection, which is copyright (C) 2001-2013 The Apache Software Foundation, and licensed under the Apache License 2.0. For more information, please see Apache2.0.txt.

@node Contributing
@appendix Contributing

Stuff that needs to be done:

@itemize @minus

@item
Translations! Right now, the program's English-only, and if you know another
language and are willing to contribute, please do so. Any language will do-
Spanish, Japanese, Welsh, Navajo, Esperanto, Klingon...
Just download poedit (poedit.net), rename MDRevealer.po to your language's ISO
631 code (en for English, fr for French, ar for Arabic, zh_TW for Traditional
Chinese, etc.), and translate whatever strings you can.

@end itemize

@section Using gettext

To extract strings for translation, run this command in
MDRevealer/src/MDRevealer (with GNU gettext installed):

@example
xgettext -k_ --add-comments="TRANSLATORS:" -o ../../po/[lang].po MDRevealer.java
call.java mtf.java Resistances.java Output.java Parser.java Organism.java
@end example

Where [lang] is your ISO 631 language code.

So for French, you would run:

@example
xgettext -k_ --add-comments="TRANSLATORS:" -o ../../po/fr.po MDRevealer.java
call.java mtf.java Resistances.java Output.java Parser.java Organism.java
@end example

You can also run makemdrevealer.sh, and rename po/MDRevealer.po to fr.po or
whatever.

To compile the program, add this line to makemdrevealer.sh:

@example
msgfmt --java2 -d build/classes -r MDRevealer -l [lang] po/[lang].po
@end example

Again, [lang] is your ISO 631 language code.

So for French, you would add:

msgfmt --java2 -d /build/classes -r MDRevealer -l fr po/fr.po

Then run the script. @xref{Compiling}.

@node Compiling
@appendix Compiling
makemdrevealer.sh is a script to automatically compile the program, add
any .po files, generate a default .po file, compile this manual,
and package a .zip file for release, as well as another .zip with the source.

To run it, you will need:

@itemize @bullet

@item
gettext (to extract the strings)

@item
texinfo (to build the manual)

@item
zip (to make the zips)

@item
apache-ant (to compile)

@item
java-environment (to compile... and to run the program, obviously!)

@end itemize

Note that these package names only apply to Parabola GNU/Linux
and other Arch Linux forks (as well as Arch itself).
Other Unix-like operating systems may use different names for them.

If you're on a Unix-like system (GNU/Linux, *BSD, OS X, etc.), just run this
from a shell: ./makemdrevealer.sh.
If you're on Windows, as RMS says, "Either throw Windows out of your computer
or throw your computer out the window" ;)@sp 1
If you aren't willing to do that, just download Cygwin and run
./makemdrevealer.sh.

Before running it, be sure to set "version" and "revision" to the current
version and revision numbers, respectively!

Also note that the script will overwrite data/config.txt with defaultconfig.txt.
To prevent this, place a # in front of:
@example
cp -f defaultconfig.txt data/config.txt
@end example

@node Contact
@appendix Contact
Feel free to contact the developers with suggestions, updated configuration
files, translations, bug reports, etc. at:
@itemize @bullet

@item
rsclifford(at)hotmail(dot)com (Robin Clifford)

@end itemize

@bye
